Update EIP-5069: Replace handbook with charter (#7468)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5069.md

 - **Assert Correctness**: While we might offer technical feedback from time to time, we are not experts nor do we vet every proposal in depth. Publishing a proposal is not an endorsement or a statement of technical soundness.

 - **Manage**: We do not track implementation status, schedule work, or set fork dates or contents.

 - **Track Registries**: We want all proposals to eventually become immutable, but a registry will never get there if anyone can keep adding items. To be clear, exhaustive and/or static lists are fine. 

 - **Provide Legal Advice**: Trademarks, copyrights, patents, prior art, and other legal matters are the responsibility of authors and implementers, not EIP Editors. We are not lawyers, and while we may occasionally make comments touching on these areas, we cannot guarantee any measure of correctness.

Documenting all of the things we would not do is impossible, and the above are just a few examples. We reserve the right to do less work whenever possible!

## Structure

### EIP Editors

> We, the Editors, consist of some number of EIP Editors and one Janitor elected by and from the EIP Editors.

Author: I really do like the term "Janitor" because other terms, like "moderator", "chairperson", "editor-in-chief" all imply some amount of authority.

I like the implication that the editor in this role "takes out the trash" and does other somewhat messy work. Being the Janitor isn't an honour, but an undesirable position to be in.

> We, the Editors, consist of some number of EIP Editors and one Janitor elected by and from the EIP Editors.

Author: I went wit "Keeper of Consensus" (or Keeper for short.)

EIP Editors are responsible for governing the EIP process itself, electing a Janitor, and stewarding proposals.

> The Janitor's two responsibilities (above their EIP Editor duties) are: to determine when rough consensus has been reached on a matter, and determine when/if it is appropriate to re-open an already settled matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Janitor's two responsibilities (on top of their EIP Editor duties) are: to determine when rough consensus has been reached on a matter, and determine when/if it is appropriate to re-open an already settled matter.
```

## Membership

Anyone may apply to join as an EIP Editor. Specific eligibility requirements are left to individual current EIP Editors, but the general requirements are:

 - A strong belief in the above mission;
 - Proficiency with English (both written and spoken);
 - Reading and critiquing EIPs;
 - Participation in governance.

EIP Editors are expected to meet these requirements throughout their tenure, and not doing so is grounds for removal. Any member may delegate some or all of their responsibilities/powers to tools and/or to other people.

## Making Decisions

### Informally

For decisions that are unlikely to be controversial&mdash;especially for decisions affecting a single proposal&mdash;an EIP Editor may choose whatever option they deem appropriate in accordance with our mission.

### Formally

Electing a Janitor, adding/removing EIP Editors, and any possibly-controversial decisions must all be made using variations of this formal process.

#### Preparation

##### Call for Input

For any matter requiring a decision, a call for input must be published in writing to the usual channels frequented by EIP Editors.

##### Quorum

> Initially, to establish a valid quorum, all EIP Editors must express their opinion (or vote where appropriate) on the matter under consideration.

Author: Went with slightly different wording, but I think I captured what you wanted here.

After thirty days from the call for input, if not all EIP Editors have responded, the quorum is reduced to the Editors that have responded. This deadline may be extended in exceptional situations.

#### Deciding

##### Electing a Janitor

> Any EIP Editor can call for an election for Janitor. The EIP Editor with the most votes once quorum is met is named Janitor until the next election completes. If there is a tie, we'll randomly choose between the EIP Editors with the most votes. Business continues as usual while the election is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any EIP Editor can call for an election for Janitor. The EIP Editor with the most votes once quorum is met is named Janitor until the next election completes. If there is a tie, the EIP Editors with the most votes will participate in a round-robin cryptographically-secure first-to-one rock-paper-scissors tournament using the following algorithm:

For each pair of participants $(p_1, p_2)$:

1. $p_i$ secretly chooses $c_i$ to be "Rock", "Paper", or "Scissors" and a random string nonce $n_i$.
2. $p_i$ reveals the value of the SHA256 hash of the ASCII-encoded string $c_in_i$ (e.g. "Rock1234".
3. $p_i$ waits for the other player to reveal their hash. If the other player takes more than 10 minutes, $p_i$ wins.
4. Each player reveals $c_i$ and $n_i$. If the other player takes more than 10 minutes, $p_i$ wins.
5. "Rock" beats "Scissors", "Paper" beats "Rock", and "Scissors" beats "Paper". In the case of a draw, GOTO 1.

The EIP Editor with the greatest number of wins wins. In the case of a draw, this process is repeated until there is a winner.

Business continues as usual while the election is running.
```

The algorithm used to randomly determine the winner needs to be fair. I propose this one.

##### Adding an EIP Editor

> An EIP Editor is added once quorum is met, provided no current EIP Editor objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An EIP Editor is added once quorum is met, provided neither an EIP Editor nor the EIP-Editor-to-be objects.
```

Author: ![image](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/assets/57262657/7ba32fc2-a34e-4f61-a77d-446cc1bffe7b)

##### Removing an EIP Editor

> An EIP Editor is removed once quorum is met, provided no current EIP Editor (aside from the one being removed) objects. If the removed Editor was also the Janitor, an election for a new Janitor begins immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An EIP Editor can be removed by another EIP Editor once quorum is met, provided no other EIP Editor objects. An EIP Editor can remove themself at any time.

If the Janitor ever ceases to be an EIP Editor, an election for a new Janitor begins immediately. A temporary Janitor must be appointed by the former Janitor.
```

Author: "can be" is the wrong word choice here. If all of the following are true:

- an Editor posts a call for input on removing an editor,
- quorum is met, and
- no one objects

Then the editor _is_ removed, not _can be_ removed.

 - **Upholding Quality**: Upholding a measure of minimally-subjective quality for each proposal as defined by its target audience.

    By adhering to defined criteria, we promote the development of high-quality and relevant proposals that drive the evolution of Ethereum.

### What we Don't

On the other hand, we do _not_:

 - **Decide Winners**: If there are multiple competing proposals, we will publish all of them. We are not in the business of deciding what is the right path for Ethereum, nor do we believe that there is One True Way to satisfy a need.

 - **Assert Correctness**: While we might offer technical feedback from time to time, we are not experts nor do we vet every proposal in depth. Publishing a proposal is not an endorsement or a statement of technical soundness.

 - **Manage**: We do not track implementation status, schedule work, or set fork dates or contents.

 - **Track Registries**: We want all proposals to eventually become immutable, but a registry will never get there if anyone can keep adding items. To be clear, exhaustive and/or static lists are fine. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Structure

### EIP Editors

We, the Editors, consist of some number of EIP Editors and one Janitor elected by and from the EIP Editors.

EIP Editors are responsible for governing the EIP process itself, electing a Janitor, and stewarding proposals.

The Janitor's two responsibilities (on top of their EIP Editor duties) are: to determine when rough consensus has been reached on a matter, and determine when/if it is appropriate to re-open an already settled matter.

## Membership

Anyone may apply to join as an EIP Editor. Specific eligibility requirements are left to individual current EIP Editors, but the general requirements are:

 - A strong belief in the above mission;
 - Proficiency with English (both written and spoken);
 - Reading and critiquing EIPs;
 - Participation in governance.

EIP Editors are expected to meet these requirements throughout their tenure, and not doing so is grounds for removal. Any member may delegate some or all of their responsibilities/powers to tools and/or to other people.

## Making Decisions

### Informally

> For decisions that are unlikely to be controversial&mdash;especially for decisions affecting a single proposal&mdash;an EIP Editor may choose whatever option they deem appropriate in accordance with our mission.

Reviewer: @SamWilsn can we replace this with the actual em dash unicode character?
```suggestion
For decisions that are unlikely to be controversial—especially for decisions affecting a single proposal—an EIP Editor may choose whatever option they deem appropriate in accordance with our mission.
```

---
eip: 5069
title: EIP Editor Handbook
description: Organizational structure, decision making process, and other EIP Editor odds and ends.
author: Pooja Ranjan (@poojaranjan), Gavin John (@Pandapip1), Sam Wilson (@SamWilsn), et al.
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/pr-5069-eip-editor-handbook/9137
status: Living
type: Meta
created: 2022-05-02
requires: 1
---

## Introduction

We, the Ethereum Improvement Proposal (EIP) Editors, maintain a repository of documents related to the Ethereum protocol and its ecosystem. Consider us both _archivists_ making sure the community as a whole does not lose its history, and a _publisher_ making sure interested parties can stay up-to-date with the latest proposals.

## Mission

### What we Do

Our mission is to serve the broad Ethereum community, both present and future, by:

>  - **Publishing Proposals**: Making proposals, including their history and associated discussions available over the long term at no cost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - **Publishing Proposals**: Facilitating high quality proposals, including their history and associated discussions available over the long term at no cost.
```

 - **Upholding Quality**: Upholding a measure of minimally-subjective quality for each proposal as defined by its target audience.

    By adhering to defined criteria, we promote the development of high-quality and relevant proposals that drive the evolution of Ethereum.
    
### What we Don't

On the other hand, we do _not_:

 - **Decide Winners**: If there are multiple competing proposals, we will publish all of them. We are not in the business of deciding what is the right path for Ethereum, nor do we believe that there is One True Way to satisfy a need.

 - **Assert Correctness**: While we might offer technical feedback from time to time, we are not experts nor do we vet every proposal in depth. Publishing a proposal is not an endorsement or a statement of technical soundness.

 - **Manage**: We do not track implementation status, schedule work, or set fork dates or contents.

 - **Track Registries**: We want all proposals to eventually become immutable, but a registry will never get there if anyone can keep adding items. To be clear, exhaustive and/or static lists are fine. 

> 

Reviewer 2: should we also add to DONOTs:

` - track or evaluate copyrights or prior art or credits`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Track Intellectual Property Claims**: Trademarks, copyrights, and patents are the responsibility of document authors and implementers, not the editors of the EIP process.
- **Track or evaluate Prior Art**: While editors may anecdotally comment on prior art in or outside of the EIP and EVM corpus, there is no expectation or assumption that they will evaluate novelty, assist in prior art review, or track contributions or acknowledgements.

```

Author: How about we lump it all into one bullet point:

```suggestion
 - **Provide Legal Advice**: Trademarks, copyrights, patents, prior art, and other legal matters are the responsibility of authors and implementers, not EIP Editors. We are not lawyers, and while we may occasionally make comments touching on these areas, we cannot guarantee any measure of correctness.
```

Reviewer 2: i am fine with either of the versions :+1:

##### Adding an EIP Editor

An EIP Editor is added once quorum is met, provided no current EIP Editor objects.

##### Removing an EIP Editor

An EIP Editor is removed once quorum is met, provided no current EIP Editor (aside from the one being removed) objects. If the removed Editor was also the Janitor, an election for a new Janitor begins immediately.

##### Other Decisions

All other decisions are made through a "rough consensus" process. This does not require all EIP Editors to agree, although this is preferred. In general, the dominant view of the Editors shall prevail. Dominance, in this process, is not determined by persistence or volume but rather a more general sense of agreement. Note that 51% does not mean "rough consensus" has been reached, and 99% is better than rough. It is up to the Janitor to determine if rough consensus has been reached. Every EIP Editor is entitled to have their opinion heard and understood before the Janitor makes that determination.

> No one, not the EIP Editors and certainly not the Janitor, holds veto powers (except when adding/removing an Editor as defined above.) It is imperative that the EIP process evolve, albeit cautiously.

Reviewer 2: if janitor decides what is `rough consensus` in contentious issues, he/she effectively has veto powers?

Reviewer 3: well by my interpretation, what the janitor has in this document is more like the authority to defer to a supermajority in overriding an individual's veto. If I may pull an analogy from the USian interpretation of montesquieu, the president can only veto an act of congress if congress votes with less than 2/3 majority.

In a case where one or two editors digs in heels and want to keep discussing, but the rest of the editors feel further deliberation won't be helpful, the difference between "full consensus" (i.e. effective unanimity) and rough consensus (which a janitor could declare) would be more like timeboxing consensus and officially declaring a default to supermajority. It's called "rough" consensus, cuz it can get a little rough!

Reviewer 3: help making this clearer in the document would be appreciated, tho.  I think it's strategically imperative that the document promise no vetos so that if people *feel* vetoed, they can feel empowered to ask for an explanation of what's happening and how it's not as simple as a veto-- so being crystal clear on failure modes and interventions is important here.

Author: My exact intention here is that the Janitor can determine _when_ rough consensus has been reached (i.e. ending discussion) but cannot determine _what_ the consensus is.

If a Janitor refuses to declare that consensus has been reached, they can be removed.

Reviewer 2: by deciding `when` it determines the `what`

Author: > by deciding `when` it determines the `what`. may be this point needs to be more chiseled out

So you're suggesting the Janitor might declare consensus has been reached before discussion naturally would've ended?

Reviewer 2: i guess so, but then he can be removed so i guess i am good with it
